3GPP TSG-WG SA2#174 S2-260xxxx Malta, MT, 13th April – 17th April, 2026 Source: Huawei, HiSilicon Title: KI#5 Enhancement to the QoS collaboration between UE and NW Document for: Approval Agenda item: 20.6.5 Work Item: FS_6G_ARC Abstract of the contribution: Update solution for UE/NW QoS collaboration solution for 6G QoS Framework. 1. Discussion In the last meeting, the necessity of the collaboration layer was already justified. However, there was a lack of detailed description regarding the specific parameters transmitted within the collaboration layer and the benefits they can bring. Therefore, this contribution provides specific parameter examples exchanged through the collaboration layer and explains their potential benefits. In addition, the collaboration layer mechanisms are categorized into two types: on-path signalling and off-path signalling. Furthermore, the procedure for establishing the collaboration layer is also presented in this document. This pCR proposes enhancements to the collaboration layer between the UE/application and the 6G UPF to achieve fine-grained, low-latency information exchange and explain the potential benefits. The traditional control-plane PDU session modification procedure is inherently designed for long-term, relative static and infrequently changing information (e.g., service types). Control-plane signaling is subject to inherent signaling overhead and relatively slow processing mechanisms, making it suitable for scenarios where information stability is prioritized over real-time performance. However, emergent AI related services are typically characterized by multi-modal, dynamic and burst traffic, which requires the network to respond promptly to real-time changes to ensure QoS guarantees. Therefore, reporting dynamic information via the user-plane collaboration layer has distinct advantages over the control-plane PDU session modification procedure: the user plane features low signaling overhead, low transmission latency, and supports real-time, frequent updates, which can promptly deliver dynamic traffic and service information to the UPF. The useful information for QoS guarantee falls into several categories: 1) Dynamic flow identification (e.g., Packet Filter for frequent server address changes), which enables UPF to accurately classify service flows; 2) Real-time traffic characteristics (e.g., Burst Size, Burst Duration, Frame Rate), which support UPF in deriving network requirements and assisting RAN scheduling; 3) Service feedback (e.g., E2E latency, QoE), which helps the network adjust policies to meet user experience expectations. These types of information are highly dynamic and time-sensitive. If they are transmitted via the control-plane may not be effective, while they are critical for network to optimize QoS policies, assist RAN in dynamic resource allocation, and ensure end-to-end QoS guarantees. By leveraging the user plane collaboration layer for real-time reporting of the information mentioned above, the network can perform near-real-time QoS tuning to avoid service degradation during traffic bursts or sudden demand changes, and the UPF can assist the RAN to leverage predictive traffic information for improved scheduling and resource allocation, thus enhancing spectral efficiency and reducing latency; third, obtain application-informed parameters that better reflect user-experience requirements, facilitating end-to-end QoS optimization. The exchange of this information will contribute to the critical need for more agile and context-aware QoS management mechanisms in 6G systems, thereby improving overall network performance, QoS flow guarantees, and user satisfaction. Besides, UPF can also collect and provide QoS monitoring-related and real-time network status information to UE via collaboration layer, which can help UE adapt behaviours accordingly. Specifically, UPF transmits network-related parameters such as real-time UL/DL latency, round-trip latency, available data rate, network congestion status, and data rate limitations to the UE. This information is vital for the UE/application to dynamically adapt its behavior (e.g., adjusting video resolution based on available data rate, reducing traffic burstiness during network congestion) to align with current network conditions, thereby further enhancing QoS and user experience. In addition, the missing procedure and service, entities and interfaces sections were added to maintain the integrity of the solution. The current 5G QoS mechanism is relatively coarse and inefficient. As 6G networks introduce a surge of Generative AI and Mixed Media services, the limitations of existing frameworks have become increasingly prominent: - Dynamic Traffic Mismatch: Traditional QoS parameters—relying on static configuration, IP 5-tuple, and extension header matching—fail to provide real-time and accurate scheduling for service-specific characteristics such as traffic bursts and continuous streams. - Intent Awareness Gap: Due to data encryption and privacy protocols, the network cannot effectively perceive the application-side "Intent" in real-time, leading to a disconnect between service requirements and network resource allocation. One of the most significant traffic mode is burst. For burst traffic, per-packet QoS assurance is often insufficient; successful service realization is dependent on the successful transmission of the entire data block. In certain extreme scenarios, the loss of even a few packets can lead to the suspension or even termination of the entire service operation. Consequently, it is necessary to bring in new QoS requirements and traffic characteristics by introducing an additional data block granularity level above that of the packet and new QoS guarantee functionalities should be designed, including burst data block organization, new block-based scheduler, redundant data transmission and congestion control implemented by the collaboration of UE and network. The following principles are applied to this solution: A new layer conveys specific QoS requirements or traffic characteristics for certain kind of service data flow. UE and UPF could touch the new layer information and append it during the SDAP encapsulation or GTP-U encapsulation process. RAN could carry on the specific information contained in SDAP or GTP-U header to guide the scheduling of radio resources (in the burst traffic case, it is block-level information ) Feedback mechanism of real-time monitoring information (in the burst traffic case, it can be the block-level ACK/NACK or block-level success ratio) to adjust QoS parameters. 2. Text proposal It is proposed to agree the following changes vs. TR 23.801-01: * * * * First change * * * * 6.5.6 Solution variant #5.6: Enhanced UE/NW QoS collaboration via a collaboration layer between UE/application and UPF via user plane signalling 6.5.6.0 Topics addressed and High-level Solution Principles This solution variant addresses bullet 4 of Key Issue 5. Solution proposals 2, 6, 9, 10, 14, 21, 31, 37, 41, 45, 46, 47, 51, 53 of Annex C, clause C.5, Table C.5-1, are used as a basis for defining this solution variant. The key principles proposed by this solution variant are: - UE/application and 6G UPF use an additional user plane layer (collaboration layer) to exchange additional information (e.g. traffic characteristics, QoS requirements, etc.) for a service data flow, QoS flow or a PDU session. - The additional information provided by the UE/application is used by the network to fine tune/adapt the QoS requirements for the service data flow. - The additional information provided by the network (UPF) to the UE/application is used by the application in the UE to adapt their behaviour. 6.5.6.1 Description The main principles of this solution variant are: - The collaboration layer between the UE/application and 6G UPF which can be divided into two major categories may be based on: - Category 1: On-path signalling methods: - Option 1: On-path signalling methods (e.g. Connect-UDP, MoQ). - Option 2: An encapsulation header on top of PDU layer of PDU session which can be defined by 3GPP without involvement of IETF. - Option 3: Adding a Context-Aware Header between IP and SDAP layer within 6GS between UE and UPF, visible for both RAN and UPF. - Option 4: Enable support for IETF SCONE. - Category 2: Off-path signalling methods. - Option 5: Using the PMF protocol as described in clause 5.32.5 of TS 23.501 [2] with the necessary enhancements to support collaboration layer. - Option 6: A secure channel based on TS 33.535 [14]. Editor's note: Other options are FFS. Editor's note: How the collaboration layer is established between UE/application and a UPF is FFS. - UE includes additional information for the service data flow via the collaboration layer. The additional information may be: - A requested QoS (i.e. within the authorized and provided multiple QoS requirements as described in Solution variant #5.4). - Flow identification. - Packet Filter (e.g., 5-tuple): Due to the frequent changes of server addresses, the UE/application can report the packet filter(s) to assist the 6G UP NF in accurate service data flows identification. - Traffic characteristics. - Traffic Pattern (UL/DL, e.g., background, burst, periodic): - The traffic pattern may be dynamically changing. For example, the UL/DL periodicity may dynamically change and could be known by the UE/Application side, e.g., the frame rate since adaptive bitrate control for streaming services is usually in the client side. - The 6G UP NF may make use of this information to derive the N6 Jitter Information associated with the DL Periodicity. The 6G UP NF may also provide the UL/DL periodicity information to the 6G RAN for, e.g., UE power saving. - Burst Size, Burst Duration and Predicted Arrived Time (DL): - The UE/Application may provide the traffic characteristics for the future downlink data burst to the 6G UP NF. For example, the UE/Application may request the 3D content download for rendering and display in the real time XR services and the future DL data bust size could be derived, estimated or predicted. Optionally, the data burst arrival time and duration may also be estimated, depending the UE implementation (e.g., AI-based prediction). - The 6G UP NF further provides these information to the 6G RAN to assist 6G RAN for efficient radio resource scheduling. - Application characteristics (e.g., Frame Rate, Frame Size, GOP Length, Resolution): - For video application, these characteristics could change dynamically and can be provided from UE side to the 6G UP NF. - The 6G UP NF can derive the network requirements for the traffic and trigger the network (e.g., 6G RAN, SCF, 6G UP NF or Network Agent) to allocate or configure resources for the application. service. - The dynamic characteristics of data burst includes: type of communication (human, AI agent), data type (e.g. traditional voice, video, text, tokenized voice, tokenized text, tokenized video), data size (or data burst volume), token size, QoS requirements (e.g. token loss rate, burst transfer latency). - Traffic characteristics like block-related information, including: Block ID, Block size, Deadline time, Priority, Block group number, Sub-group sequence number, etc. - Feedback of monitoring information including actual receiving time of data block or feedback of success ratio (packets successfully transmitted in the whole data block), which may assist UPF to make the retransmission decision. - Service Feedback. - E2E latency requirement or measurement: UE can monitor compliance with end-to-end latency targets and report to the 6G UP NF to trigger adjusting QoS policies (e.g., increasing traffic priority) when latency exceeds thresholds. - Service Experience / QoE metric (e.g., MOS): Evaluating user experience to adjust QoS parameters (e.g., increasing bitrate) if QoE falls below thresholds. Editor's note: How service experience / QoE is measured and reported, and how the thresholds will be decided is FFS. Editor's note: How the UE determines QoS requirements and traffic characteristics is FFS. - The 6G UPF: - Option 1: Provides additional information to the PCF (via SMF) for Policy determination (e.g. updated QoS rules). - Option 2: Provides additional information to the RAN (e.g., UE requested QoS or traffic characteristics) for better resource management of the associated QoS flow. Editor’s note: Option 1 and Option 2 can be used simultaneously based on service requirements and/or operator configurations. Editor's note: Details of resource management based on UE requested QoS may be coordinated with the discussion in bullet#2. Editor's note: Details on additional information provided by the UPF is FFS (e.g. whether the additional information is the information provided by the UE/Application via the collaboration layer). Editor's note: Other options are FFS. - In addition, based on configuration or AF request the network exposes network related information via the collaboration layer to the UE/Application. The network related information may be: - Network status information as per QoS monitoring parameters, i.e. via the existing or enhanced QoS monitoring mechanisms, which UE can use to adjust service behaviour. - the UL and/or DL latency, round trip latency. - the available data rate; - the congestion information; - An operator configured maximum available data rate. Editor's note: The information provided by the network to the UE via the collaboration layer is FFS. The packets carrying collaboration information are transferred over the dedicated UL and DL QoS flows. 6.5.6.2 Procedures In this clause, how the UE or application requests to enable the collaboration mechanism is elaborated as following. Figure 6.5.6.2-1 high-level procedure on establishment of the collaboration mechanism between UE and 6G UP NF 0. The UE or Application may request the collaboration with the Network Agent, providing the flow description, the capability supporting collaboration, the collaboration indicator, requested functionality(-ies) of the collaboration layer and the collaboration protocol. - The flow description indicates the application service which requires collaboration with the network. - The collaboration indicator is to indicate that the QoS collaboration between the UE/application and the network is needed. - The requested functionality indicates the main purpose that this collaboration layer is used for. For example, the real time exposure of the network information which indicates the network information to be exposed by the network, i.e. network congestion, available bitrate, etc. or the application traffic information to be provided to the network and corresponding handling information. - The collaboration protocol indicates the target protocol used for the collaboration layer between the UE/Application and the network, e.g. MoQ protocol, since multiple protocols could be used to support the collaboration between UE/Application and Network. 1. The 6G Control Plane NFs (e.g. Network Agent, SCF(Session Control Function) and 6G PCF) authorize the request from the UE or Application based on the local configuration, UE subscription and/or the SLA between the MNO and the applications. 2. Furthermore, the 6G Control Plane NFs enable the collaboration mechanism between UE/Application and 6G UP NF. 3. The SCF and 6G PCF generate the collaboration configuration which may contain the collaboration indicator to enable the collaboration mechanism establishment, the dedicated functionality of this collaboration layer, the collaboration protocol to be used, etc. based on the AF/UE input and/or operator’s local configuration. For example, if the dedicated functionality indicates the real time exposure of the network information, the (enhanced) QoS monitoring may be enabled. 3a. The SCF provides the corresponding N4 rules to the 6G UP NF along with the collaboration indicator, collaboration protocol if available and optionally the QoS monitoring control information. If needed, it also instructs the 6G UP NF to report its address information, i.e. IP address and/or port number. 3a. Optionally, if the dedicated functionality indicates the real time exposure of the network information, the SCF may indicate 6G RAN to enable the QoS monitoring and report the QoS performance to the UPF. 4. Similarly, based on the input from the 6G PCF and/or local configuration, the SCF may provide the UE with the address information of the 6G UP NF if available, i.e. IP address and/or port number, along with the collaboration indicator and optionally collaboration protocol to be used, which triggers the UE to initiate collaboration mechanism connection with the 6G UP NF. 5. Complete the remaining steps of Session Establishment/Modification procedure. Dedicated UL and DL QoS flows are established between the UE and 6G UP NF for collaboration, QoS monitoring and performance reporting purposes. 6. Optionally, based on the collaboration indicator and the 6G UP NF address info, the UE initiates a collaboration to the 6G UP NF, e.g. MoQ. 7. The UE/Application may provide the application traffic information and application needs to the 6G UP NF via the 3GPP defined container carried over the collaboration protocol. And similarly, the 6G UP NF sends the network information reported by the 6G RAN to the UE via the 3GPP defined container carried over the collaboration protocol when the dedicated functionality indicates the real time exposure of the network information. 6.5.6.3 Services, Entities and Interfaces - 6G UP NF supports the following functionality: - Establish the collaboration between UE and 6G UP NF, exchange the application information and/or network information via the collaboration mechanism. - Derive traffic characteristic information and/or QoS requirements according to the information provided by UE/Application. - Perceive the network information based on the network information provided by the RAN and/or the SM/6G PCF and mark the network information into the 3GPP defined container carried over the collaboration protocol of DL packet(s). - Mark the timestamp, packet SN, etc. for QoS performance monitoring and measurement. - UE supports the following functionality: - Establish the collaboration between UE and UPF, exchange the application information and/or network information via the collaboration mechanism. - Perceive service needs and traffic characteristics, and further send them to the 6G UP NF via the 3GPP defined container carried over the collaboration protocol of UL packet(s). - Receive the network information from the 6G UP NF via the collaboration mechanism for application layer adaptation, e.g. rate adaptation. - Mark the timestamp, packet SN, etc. for QoS performance monitoring and measurement. - The 6G RAN supports the following functionality: - Enhance the scheduling enhancements based on the service needs and traffic characteristics provided by 6G UP NF. 6.5.6.4 Issues * * * * End of changes * * * *
